initial Crux tutorial (#7)
GaloisInc/crux: tutorial/src/installing.md

# Installing Crux

This chapter covers installing `crux-mir-comp` from a pre-built binary distribution. If you'd like to build `crux-mir-comp` from source instead, see [Appendix B: Building from Source](./building-from-source.md).

## Supported platforms

> Crux is developed and tested on Linux and macOS (including Apple Silicon). Windows is not officially supported.

Reviewer: We could link to https://github.com/GaloisInc/mir-json/issues/275 for readers interested in what is blocking Windows support.

Author: Thanks--added a link.

## Prerequisites

You will need a [Rust](https://rust-lang.org/) compiler, which you can install via the [rustup](https://rustup.rs/) tool.

## 1. Download the SAW release

> `crux-mir-comp` is distributed as part of the [SAW](https://github.com/GaloisInc/saw-script) release. Download the latest release from the [SAW releases page](https://github.com/GaloisInc/saw-script/releases). Choose the `-with-solvers` variant for your platform to get bundled SMT solvers.

Reviewer: Note that these instructions will need to change soon, as we are planning to split `crux-mir-comp` into its own binary distribution as part of the next releases (https://github.com/GaloisInc/saw-script/pull/3209).

Reviewer 2: Or even better, point to the [saw-suite](https://github.com/GaloisInc/saw-suite/actions) distribution that includes `mir-json` and solvers?

Author: Is saw-suite the recommended way to install `crux-mir-comp`? That looks like the easiest approach to me. I think it would be good for the tutorial to highlight one recommended installation approach.

Reviewer 2: I think so - @RyanGlScott do you agree?
We certainly should improve how `saw-suite` is bundled, and include the docs and all the other (currently missing) bits. Also, there is a `saw-suite` docker image, which has all the variables properly set, and as of now has rust installed as well.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/GaloisInc/saw-suite/issues/6

Reviewer: `saw-suite` is one way you can obtain it, but it is a pretty large sledgehammer---it comes with far more than just `crux-mir-comp`. Personally, I would want to recommend a more minimal way to install `crux-mir-comp` for those who don't want all of the extra bells and whistles that `saw-suite` provides.

Author: @RyanGlScott Do you have a sense of when `crux-mir-comp` will be available as a freestanding binary? If it will be a while, I might edit this section to describe `saw-suite` and then update it when standalone `crux-mir-comp` becomes available. If it's soon, I'll leave this section alone for now.

Reviewer: My sense is that this wouldn't happen until the next major releases of the tools, which may not happen for a bit. I think mentioning `saw-suite` is fine, but I agree that we should list alternatives as they become available.

Author: Good to know, thanks. In that case, unless there's any objection, I'll update the installation section to describe `saw-suite` and add a "stay tuned" paragraph about a future standalone binary distribution.

Author: I overhauled the installation section to focus on the saw-suite distribution, which makes the instructions considerably simpler--thanks for the suggestion! I'll add instructions for the standalone binary when it becomes available.

For macOS on Apple Silicon:

```bash
gh release download v1.5.1 --repo GaloisInc/saw-script \

>   --pattern "saw-1.5.1-macos-15-ARM64-with-solvers.tar.gz"

Reviewer: I would be surprised if most users have the `gh` tool already installed, or even know what it is.

Author: Good point--I modified the download commands to use `curl`.

tar xzf saw-1.5.1-macos-15-ARM64-with-solvers.tar.gz
```

Add the `bin/` directory to your PATH:

```bash
export PATH=$(pwd)/saw-1.5.1-macos-15-ARM64-with-solvers/bin:$PATH
```

Verify that the binary works:

```bash
crux-mir-comp --version
```

## 2. Install `mir-json`

> `mir-json` translates Rust code into an intermediate representation (IR) called MIR for Crux to consume. `mir-json` requires a specific nightly Rust toolchain and must match the SAW release version you downloaded.

Reviewer: Consider hyperlinking to https://github.com/GaloisInc/mir-json here.

Author: The new installation instructions don't require users to interact with `mir-json` directly. It might still be worthwhile to mention implementation details like `mir-json` somewhere, but I think it's better to do so further into the tutorial.

For SAW v1.5.1, the matching `mir-json` commit is `7e12cecee9aceefd903191f4bd888d68e9a9cc0a` and the required toolchain is `nightly-2025-09-14`:

```bash
rustup toolchain install nightly-2025-09-14 --component rustc-dev,rust-src
git clone https://github.com/GaloisInc/mir-json.git
cd mir-json
git checkout 7e12cecee9aceefd903191f4bd888d68e9a9cc0a
cargo +nightly-2025-09-14 install --path . --locked

> ```

Reviewer: It does worry me a bit that we will have to keep this documentation up to date with new SAW releases, which introduces an opportunity for the documentation to rot over time. (I'm not sure what the best solution for this is just yet, but food for thought.)

Reviewer 2: we should just have an install script - see #8

Author: The `saw-suite`-based instructions should eliminate this problem.

These commands install `mir-json`, `crux-rustc`, `cargo-crux-test`, and related tools into `~/.cargo/bin/`.

**Finding the correct `mir-json` version for other SAW releases:** `mir-json` is a submodule of the saw-script repository at `deps/mir-json`. To find the matching commit for a given SAW release tag, run:

```bash
git ls-tree <saw-release-tag> deps/mir-json
```

The nightly toolchain version is specified in `rust-toolchain.toml` within the `mir-json` repository at that commit.

## 3. Translate the standard libraries

Crux needs pre-translated versions of the Rust standard library. From the directory where you cloned `mir-json`, run:

```bash
mir-json-translate-libs
```

> This command creates an `rlibs_real` directory containing the translated libraries.

Reviewer: Users shouldn't have to care about `rlibs_real`, as that is an implementation detail. I think the documentation should mention the `rlibs` symlink instead, as that avoids the need to figure out what target triple you're using.

Author: Use of `saw-suite` eliminates this issue.

## 4. Set environment variables

Point Crux at the translated libraries. The path depends on your platform:

```bash
export CRUX_RUST_LIBRARY_PATH=$(pwd)/rlibs_real/lib/rustlib/aarch64-apple-darwin/lib
```

On Linux, replace `aarch64-apple-darwin` with your target triple (e.g., `x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu`).

We recommend adding this line to your shell configuration (`.bashrc`, `.zshrc`, etc.).

## 5. Verify the installation

> Create a small test file to confirm that the fulolchain (`mir-json`, translated libraries, and solver) works end-to-end:

Reviewer: Typo?

```suggestion
Create a small test file to confirm that the full toolchain (`mir-json`, translated libraries, and solver) works end-to-end:
```

Author: Fixed in edited text--thanks!
